# MicrogliaChIPseq
Reanalysis of published mouse microglia ChIPseq datasets

Goal: Analyze ChIPseq data from mouse microglia from published papers:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE62826
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSM1545960



https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE89960

Dataset #1 H3K27ac ChIPseq from acutely isolated microglia 
For ChIP-Seq experiments, a cross-linking step with paraformaldehyde was performed immediately after staining but before microglia sorting. Briefly, a subset of human cells, and mouse cells to be used for ChIP-Seq, were washed once after staining, fixed at RT with 1% paraformaldehyde in PBS (Affymetrix 19943 1 LT) for 10 minutes, incubated for 5 min at RT with glycine to a final concentration of 0.125 M for PFA quenching, and washed twice with cold staining buffer. Microglia were then sorted as described above. After sorting, microglia were pelleted and snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80 C until chromatin immunoprecipitation. Chromatin immunoprecipitation for histone modification H3K4me2, H3K27ac and transcription factor PU.1 was performed as followed, using 500,000 to 2 million microglia per assay. First microglia were briefly thawed on ice and lysed by incubation in 1 ml of lysis buffer (0.5% IGEPAL CA-630, 10 mM HEPES pH 7.9, 85 mM KCl, 1 mM EDTA pH 8.0, in water) for 10 min on ice. Lysate were centrifuge at 800 x rcf for 5 min at 4°C, and pellets were resuspended in 200 l of sonication/immunoprecipitation buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 100 mM NaCl, 0.5 mM EGTA, 0.1% Deoxcycholate, 0.5% Sarkosyl, in water). Sonication was performed with a Bioruptor Standard Sonicator (Diagenode) and consisted of two rounds of 15 min each, alternating stages of 30 sec “sonication-on” with 60 sec “sonication-off”. Twenty-two microliters of 10% Triton-X were then added to samples (1% final concentration) on ice, and lysates were cleared by centrifugation for 5 min at 18,000 x rcf at 4°C. Two microliters of supernatant were then set aside for input library sequencing controls. Supernatants were then immunoprecipitated on a rotator for 2 h at 4°C with antibody pre-bound to 20 l Protein A Dynabeads (Life Technologies 10001D). The following antibodies were used: H3k4me2 (Millipore, 07030), 2.0 l from stock per sample; H3K27ac (Active Motif, 39135), 1.5 l from stock per sample; and PU.1 (Santa Cruz, sc-352), 3.0 g per sample. Immunoprecipitates were washed three times each on ice with ice-cold wash buffer I (150 mM NaCl, 1% Triton X-100, 0.1% SDS, 2 mM EDTA pH 8.0 in water), wash buffer III (10 mM Tris-HCl, 250 mM LiCl, 1% IGEPAL CA-630, 0.7% Deoxycholate, 1mM EDTA in water) and TET (10 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 1 mM EDTA pH 8.0, 0.1% Tween-20, in water) and eluted with 1% SDS/TE at room temperature in a final volume of 100 l. Reverse-crosslinking was then performed on immunoprecipitates and saved input aliquots. First, 6.38 l of 5 M NaCl (final concentration 300 mM) was added to each samples immersed in 100 l SDS/TE. Crosslinking was then reversed by overnight incubation at 65°C in a hot air oven. Potentially contaminated RNA was then digested for 1 h at 37°C with 0.33 mg/ml RNase A, proteins digested for 1 h at 55°C with 0.5 mg/ml proteinase K, and DNA extracted using Sera-Mag SpeedBeads (Thermo Scientific, 6515205050250). Sequencing libraries were prepared from recovered DNA (ChIP) or generated cDNA (RNA) by blunting, A-tailing, adapter ligation as previously described (2) using barcoded adapters (NextFlex, Bioo Scientific). Prior final PCR amplification, RNA-Seq libraries were digested by 30 min incubation at 37 C with Uracil DNA Glycosylase (final concentration of 0.134 units per l of library volume; UDG, Enzymatics G5010L) to generate strand-specific libraries. Libraries were PCR-amplified for 12-15 cycles and size selected for fragments (200-325 bp for ChIP-Seq, 200-350 for RNA-Seq) by gel extraction (10% TBE gels, Life Technologies EC62752BOX). RNA-Seq and ChIP-seq librairies were single-end sequenced for 51 cycles on an Illumina HiSeq 4000 or NextSeq 2500 (Illumina, San Diego, CA) according to manufacturer’s instruction.
Mice were euthanized with CO2 and quickly perfused intracardially with ice-cold DPBS (Mediatech 21-031CV). Whole brains were removed and gently mechanically homogenized on ice as described above. Cells were fractionated by Percoll gradient centrifugation, washed, FC blocked with CD16/32 antibody (1:50, eBioscience 14-0161, clone 93) on ice for 15 min, stained 1:100 with CD11b-APC (BioLegend 101212, clone M1/70) and CD45-Alexa Fluor 488 (BioLegend 103122, clone 30-F11). Microglia were then purified by cell sorting as specified above, with microglia defined as live-CD11b+CD45Low single cells. Typical yield was roughly 250,000 microglia per mouse brain.


Tag directories for the ChIP-seq experiments were combined into an ex vivo and in vitro pool for each target in both mouse and human. The tag directories for the input DNA were likewise combined. Peaks were then called on the pooled tags with the pooled input DNA as background using HOMER’s findPeaks command with the following parameters for the PU.1 ChIP-seq: “-style factor -size 200 -minDist 200” and the following parameters for the H3K27ac and H3K4me2 ChIP-seq: “-style histone -size 500 -minDist 1000 -region.” The “-tbp” parameter was set to the number of replicates in the pool. For identifying regions that are deacetylated in vitro, peaks for H3K27ac replicates were called individually, then merged using bedtools. A matrix containing the number of reads in each merged peak in each replicate was generated using HOMER’s annotatePeaks command with the following parameters: “-size given -noadj -tbp 1”. The read count matrix was then loaded into R and the limma package with voom normalization was used to identify peaks where the reads were reduced more than two-fold in vitro at an FDR of 0.05.
Fastq files from sequencing experiments were mapped to either the UCSC genome build hg38 (for human) or mm10 (for mouse). STAR with default parameters was used to map RNA-Seq experiments (3). Bowtie2 with default parameters was used to map ATAC-Seq and ChIP-Seq experiments (4). HOMER was used to convert aligned reads into “tag directories” for further analysis (2).
Genome_build: mm10
Supplementary_files_format_and_content: Table of unnormalized read counts for RNA-seq, table of TPM values for RNA-seq, BED files of peaks for ATAC-seq and ChIP-seq













Dataset #3 ATAC-seq from acutely isolated microglia: 
80,000 isolated microglia were lysed in 50 l lysis buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl ph 7.5, 10 mM NaCl, 3 mM MgCl2, 0.1% IGEPAL, CA-630, in water) on ice and nuclei were pelleted by centrifugation at 500 x rcf for 10 min. Nuclei were then resuspended in 50 l transposase reaction mix (1x Tagment DNA buffer (Illumina 15027866), 2.5 l Tagment DNA enzyme I (Illumina 15027865), in water) and incubated at 37 C for 30 min on a PCR cycler. DNA was then purified with Zymo ChIP DNA concentrator columns (Zymo Research D5205) and eluted with 10 ul of elution buffer. DNA was then amplified with PCR mix (1.25 M Nextera primer 1, 1.25 M Nextera primer 2-bar code, 0.6x SYBR Green I (Life Technologies, S7563), 1x NEBNext High-Fidelity 2x PCR MasterMix, (NEBM0541)) for 8-12 cycles, run on a gel for size selection of fragments (160-290 bp), extracted from gel and single-end sequenced for 51 cycles on a HiSeq 4000 or NextSeq 2500. Mice were euthanized with CO2 and quickly perfused intracardially with ice-cold DPBS (Mediatech 21-031CV). Whole brains were removed and gently mechanically homogenized on ice as described above. Cells were fractionated by Percoll gradient centrifugation, washed, FC blocked with CD16/32 antibody (1:50, eBioscience 14-0161, clone 93) on ice for 15 min, stained 1:100 with CD11b-APC (BioLegend 101212, clone M1/70) and CD45-Alexa Fluor 488 (BioLegend 103122, clone 30-F11). Microglia were then purified by cell sorting as specified above, with microglia defined as live-CD11b+CD45Low single cells. Typical yield was roughly 250,000 microglia per mouse brain.

Tag directories for the ATAC-seq experiments were combined into an ex vivo and in vitro pool for both mouse and human. Peaks were then called on the pooled tags using HOMER’s findPeaks command with the following parameters: “-style factor -size 200 -minDist 200” with the “-tbp” parameter was set to the number of replicates in the pool.
Library strategy: ATAC-Seq
Fastq files from sequencing experiments were mapped to either the UCSC genome build hg38 (for human) or mm10 (for mouse). STAR with default parameters was used to map RNA-Seq experiments (3). Bowtie2 with default parameters was used to map ATAC-Seq and ChIP-Seq experiments (4). HOMER was used to convert aligned reads into “tag directories” for further analysis (2).
Genome_build: mm10
Supplementary_files_format_and_content: Table of unnormalized read counts for RNA-seq, table of TPM values for RNA-seq, BED files of peaks for ATAC-seq and ChIP-seq
